---
title: "Click Counter the Making"
brief: "Here i talked about my journey learning react, and building counter app  using useReducer and a customHook to really get a grasp on how react and reactHooks works"

date: "2023-01-10"
---

React was invented in facebook and since it's released it has been adapted by alot of big companies, As a new programmer we often wonder why react, why was it invented in the first place, what does it aim to solve.
What is React; React is a fontend Library not a framework, knowing the difference would really ease your learning process and how to appraoch problems the with react and why react is the way it is. React has been controversial and i feel this is because React wants us to think about UI and Behaviour in a different way. alot of new comers find it difficult to really grasp React especailly if your Javascript background isn't so great. However once you really get main idea of react, you can't help but appreciate it. At its core react says lets associate UI and behaviour, (behaviour being state), i.e the UI should be a function of the state, how does this really help, well to appreciate react lets go back in time.
Before now we had, HTML for UI, CSS for Layout, Javascript for Behaviour and maybe Redux for state, this is not so different from the Usestate react gives us, however redux has a sligtly different approach to this, if you don't know what redux is, its a state Management library, used to manage Large scale app, it's not native to react, as it can be used with Vanila JS, Angular, React, Vue , e.t.c.
Back to react, Why was reacted built, Here i would be using a Counter App to demonstrate how react simplifies developing Large scale Apps and how it makes maintaining, Debugging and scalling App easy.

Lets take a Look at a simple Counter App:
in this counter App we want to have 3 buttons, increment, decrement and reset. Before React the Approach would be to have a 3 buttons separate from each other and when it's clicked we get the event handler associated with the button, and we run a function to increase the variable holding the state, this is almost always done in an imperative way, that is we describe every step the function would take, and if we miss a step, the operation is sure to fail, with an imperative approach bugs can be easily introduced in the process, code base would grow expotentially, maintaining it gets even difficult with every feature added, remeber this is just a single App, in a real work scenario we would have multiple application with multiple states, and some times states are shared among different features, if functions are not pure, (function that do not mutate the global variable, or function that only depends on the arguments passed to it) you can have functions change global state, resulting in unexpected behaviours and bugs. This are just some of the few issues react tend to solve, to lets dive in.

The React Approach;
with react we thing in independent, or modular form, think of a react app like object, each with its own characteristics, looks and behaviour, React calls it Components. Components are just Javascript function that returns UI, (jsx) this is very similar to HTML so you don't have to worry about learning a different markup language. Component like boxes can have state. Think of state like a Variable used to hold the current value. state can be any data structure, Array, Int, Boolean, Object, string. The returned UI should be dependent on a state. Let try to use a real worl scenario, let thing of state inform of matter, it can be liguid, gaseous or solid, and you have the ability to make anything from thin air, in this case UI would be the container in which we would put our our state, say you have water, you best best would be obviouly to get a material that is water resistance and can hold water. React works in a similar way, we have a state and we return a UI (user Interface), now lets use this approach to code code a counter App;
